Hey Mark,

Congrats on getting back on the workout and breaking out the juicer. What I’ve found for myself regarding fatigue has to do with mineral deficiency which slows the production of the hormones needed.
A nutritionist I know writes that our food is so mineral deficient that Pituitary Glands, Thyroid, Hypothalamus are unable to produce the necessary hormones and other body chemicals to keep us feeling good.
  *  The happy hormones like Dopemine are deplete so no wonder we feel depressed.
  *  Our Adrenals are burned out from stress so no wonder we’re sluggish.

So just encouraging you to fire-up the juicer or blender and throw every dark leafy green that is ORGANIC, NON-GMO in there on a base of apple juice with honey or Stevia to make it palatable.

Here’s the receipe:
  *  Get Organic greens at Whole Foods, it’s right down the street from you, now.
  *  Get Kale, Chard, Celery, Cucumber, Spinach,
  *  Get Evolution brand Organic Apple Juice, (it’s non-pasteurized, cold-pressed)
  *  (Eye-ball and experiment with portions)
  *  Pour in 2 cups of Apple Juice
  *  Throw in a “hand-full” of each of the Greens.
  *  Blend
  *  Add honey or Stevis for taste
  *  Add as much water as Green puree so it’s not so thick. 8oz of Greens, 8oz of water
  *  Drink it for lunch and eat some nuts with it so you’re chewing something with it that stimulates the digestive enzymes.

Next Mineral source:
  *  Get purified water, add minerals to it. Get Liquimins Trace Minerals, blue bottle and add 20-40 drops per gallon. Make sure you don’t over mineralize ruins the taste.
If you get the right number of drops it will make the water taste slightly sweeter and goes down smooth. DRINK LOTS OF WATER.
  *  OR get mineralized water, the best is available in Carlsbad from a deep mineral well, called Carlsbad Mineral Water. They deliver or you can get some there and fill your jug which is what I do.

That’s it for now, 2 tips on how to raise your energy level. More later.

Cheers,……..and AHO
