====== Google Fail ======

Every headline must be provocative.
Every story must be based on hard science.
Google taken over by suits
Accountants and marketing guys. As bad as jobs and gates.
Google Pixel strategy
Google dropped the Android ball
Android has not changed in 4 years.
You can buy a $200 phone running Android 5.
You can buy a $300 phone running Android 6.
You can buy a $400 phone running Android 7.
You can buy a $600 phone running Android 8.
To get Android 9 you have to pay $800 or more.
All of the current apps run on Android 5 just as well as on Android 9. This is evidence that Android has not changed has not improved since Android 5.
Normally when you buy a new software product you can expect to have to upgrade pieces of your operating system to support the new software. software is upgraded to take advantage of new capabilities and features of the hardware and operating system.
So Google is hamstringing Android to allow marketers to differentiate price points by the Android version number. 
A private proprietary play store. An idea stolen from the control freak Steve Jobs.
What we need in a Phone OS
Phone replaces laptop
Phone needs full Linux 
Phone needs windowing
Phone OS must be open source
All the cool kids are using Ubuntu on their laptops.
An appeal to Huawei: please give us the full, windowed, open source Ubuntu on the phone. 
I already have a Bluetooth keyboard a Bluetooth pen and a Bluetooth mouse all three of which connect to my phone.  I already have a USB to HDMI cable so I can plug my phone into my large screen TV. And I have a terabyte of disc on my phone. Now all I need is some decent operating system software and I have all the capability of my laptop on my phone.

No play store.
Developers can write apps in any language.
Consumers can download apps from anywhere.
Consumer electronics now lead by China
Smartphones
Vehicles
Turnover every year. Like fashion.
Smartphones control all the other appliances.
China already leads the world in electric vehicles. Vehicles will soon go to a sharing model.
TV, laptop, air conditioners, and kitchen appliances last for five or ten years.
USA desperate in loss of consumer electronics
Consumer electronics now includes vehicles
Android limitations
windowing, Java apps, private play store, multitasking, language support, run all Linux apps, run wine to get window apps, 

The good news about Android is the easy-to-use, touch-screen interface, with integrated camera, GPS, accelerometer, etc.  Thanks to Apple for designing it, and to the Google Android team for copying it.
Why Google lost it's leadership position in smartphones
Taken over by suits
Abandoned Nexus strategy in favor of pixel strategy which is to compete against Samsung 4 premium phone market.
Dropped the ball on Android.
Caved into government demands.
Why the US lost its leadership position in smartphones
The US leadership in smartphones was defined by the Android software from Google and the Snapdragon chip from Qualcomm.
Petro-vehicles
Outlaw petro-vehicles and eliminate the attendant
Noise pollution
Air pollution
Wars

Google Caves
 to governments, China, NSA, versus Huawei

Trade War
There is no trade war.
You remember that story arc in the Sopranos about the guy with the hardware store.
This is a high school buddy of Tony’s.  His son is dating Tony’s daughter.  He has a gambling problem.
Tony gets him into a game that’s over his head.  He loses big and is in debt to Tony.  Tony starts threatening him.  Tony’s gang takes over the hardware store and uses it for fencing stolen goods and various financial frauds.  When they have driven it to the ground, they  burn it for the insurance money.
The guy loses everything: his business, his car, his house, his wife, his family.
That’s us.  The USA is so in debt to China, they have us by the balls.  When they let go, we’re finished.

Hong Kong News
No.  The USA’s thoughts, the president’s pronouncements, are irrelevant.




